Jeff, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Thank you for having me.
It's great to have you here.
We're going to talk maps and consuming map data
and a lot of interesting research that you've done with the data.
So you have a very cool project,
OSMNX, OpenStreetMapNetworkX,
that we're going to dive into,
and it really makes all of this street and map data
super accessible to users of Python, right?
Yeah.
Yeah. Excellent.
I'm really looking forward to talking about that.
Before we dive into it, though, just a quick introduction.
Who are you?
Yeah, so my name is Jeff Boeing.
I'm an assistant professor at the University of Southern California
here in Los Angeles.
I'm in its Department of Urban Planning and Spatial Analysis.
And most of my research and teaching are around that intersection
of urban planning and spatial analysis.
I did my PhD in city planning at UC Berkeley.
And my focus is on urban data science.
So using Python tools, usually open data,
to try to understand cities and housing markets
and transportation networks and how people move through space
and how we can make our cities more resilient to natural disasters,
which is relevant in L.A. this week.
Also more equitable, nicer places to walk around
and basically just better for urban living.
Okay.
Well, that sounds like amazing, amazing research.
It's probably interesting to live in L.A.
as one of the bigger, crazier locations
in terms of traffic and congestion and population.
It's not New York in terms of density,
but it's probably its own special beast, I imagine.
Yeah, it is.
You know, L.A. is an ironic place
to be an urban planning professor
because it can be so frustrating
for a lot of our best practices in urban planning.
But at the same time,
there is no better place in the U.S.
to be studying and trying to intervene
into some of these crises that urban planning has wrought.
Yeah.
Yeah, a lot of it was just,
I imagine in the early days,
just a free-for-all, right?
There was people, especially out in the West, right?
The U.S. West, people would just move out there
and there was not a whole lot going on.
So what a city, just neighborhoods go that way
and not quite enough density
for a lot of public transit makes it challenging.
And then they become huge cities,
but they're stuck with those consequences.
Yeah, exactly.
And it's hard to retrofit a city once it's built out
because those are people's homes and private properties
that you can't just cut from whole cloth,
lay down a new city plan.
Yeah, yeah.
Are there cities out there
that are basically planned from scratch?
Yeah, there are.
Places like Brasilia, the capital of Brazil,
was a master-planned city.
In the modernist era, mid-century city planning,
where it's designed to look almost like the shape of an airplane
for the jet age, a modern city for the jet age.
Amazing.
But there's a wide range of how cities come to be.
Some of them are very organic,
like you think old medieval cities
that just kind of formed over centuries.
There are places like L.A. that built out very rapidly,
or like in Chicago,
all these straight lines following from these 19th century ideas
of rationality and orthogonal street networks.
And then there are these master-planned cities
where strong central leadership lets you lay it down
however you think is best.
I imagine that how the cities are built
has a lot to do with the people who helped construct the city
or there in the early days,
how they perceived distance.
People perceive distance in L.A.
by how far can you go in a car in 20 minutes.
The people perceived distance in Stuttgart,
how far can you walk?
Maybe you can take a horse, potentially.
Right.
And that really probably changes things.
Yeah.
You know, one way we talk about that idea
of the perception of distance
and how the urban form shapes up
is this idea of transportation technologies
in different eras.
And in general,
you really see something of a death of geography.
That is, if you look at a 1990s suburb of Philadelphia
or of Los Angeles,
they look very similar to each other.
You don't see that sort of local culture.
What you see is really building around
the transportation technology
and design aesthetic of the era
rather than the local hands building the place up.
And it's, you know,
when cars are how you get around,
you build a city designed for cars.
Yeah.
And then the cars get to be huge SUVs
and they still don't fit.
All right.
Let's talk.
You have this really cool visualization,
which I'm going to link to in the show notes
called City Street Orientations Around the World.
And it's got some pretty wild graphics.
You want to tell people about this
and kind of try to describe it for folks listening?
Yeah.
So what these show is the orientation
of your city streets.
By orientation, we mean on a compass.
Like, do they point north, south, east, west?
Are they off that north, south, east, west orientation?
Or do your streets point more chaotically
in all directions around the compass?
Like there isn't a more consistent orientation.
So to visualize these,
I used what's basically just a histogram,
but it's a polar histogram.
So where a normal histogram
will count your observations
across some set of bins,
for a polar histogram,
we've wrapped those bins
around the circle of a compass
so that each bin represents 10 degrees
around the compass.
And there's 36 bins total
for 360 degrees around the circle.
And then the length of each of the bars
in those bins represents the frequency
of streets pointing in that direction
in the city.
So in a place like Chicago
or Beijing on screen here,
most of the streets point north, south, east, west.
And what that tells us
is it's kind of grid-like.
And this is common
in a lot of cities around the world.
Even a lot of pre-modern cities
would still orient themselves
generally north, south, east, west,
just based on patterns
where the sun was rising and setting.
Yeah, I'm super surprised to see,
for example, Barcelona is pretty,
not north, south, but it's 90 degrees.
Yeah.
Yeah, so in Barcelona,
you see that 19th century
and early 20th century
ishampla development.
So around medieval old Barcelona,
Ildefon Serrida laid out
his grand city plan
that is fairly grid-like around it.
You can really see that here.
Yeah, absolutely.
For people listening,
some of them look like
airplane four-blade propellers
and some look maybe like boat propellers,
like really dense.
But yeah, it's quite wild
to get a quick look.
Do we have LA in there?
We must, right?
I have LA in the big one.
If you scroll down,
we have American cities.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay.
That's a pretty stark contrast.
It's like all of them
are propeller looking
other than Boston
and interestingly, Charlotte.
Boston is a city.
Yeah, really interesting.
Yeah, but Charlotte doesn't feel
like a city like that to me.
But what do I do?
Yeah, so Boston is kind of
one of those pre-modern,
say, American cities.
And its street orientation
looks like that
for a couple of reasons.
One, Boston is an agglomeration
of multiple smaller towns
over several centuries.
And each of them had grids
to some extent,
but they didn't all face
the same way.
So they all got merged together.
And then it has a lot of hills
that made it harder to build,
especially in the early days.
And it really predated
America's obsession with grids.
Charlotte is kind of the opposite.
It's late 20th century,
the sort of winding streets
and cul-de-sacs
to make up those,
you know, arterial roads
and then sort of secluded
in the center super blocks
of subdivisions.
Nice.
Well, I'm happy to see
that Portland, where I live,
is like a perfect
propeller blade shape.
You know, in our town,
you have northeast,
northwest, southeast,
and then street numbers
like northeast 120th Street,
right?
And it just screams.
We're on a perpendicular
north-south-east-west grid.
And it definitely shows up here.
And so this is some of the stuff
that you came up with,
OSMNX?
Yeah.
So I used OSMNX
to build all of these
street network models
from OpenStreetMap data.
And then OSMNX
has built into it
a visualization module
that creates these kind
of polar histograms
to understand how streets
are oriented.
awesome.
It's super interesting.
Let's,
and it's like,
it communicates to you
just immediately
as you look at it.
It's great.
Let's start by talking
about OpenStreetMap.
This is the backing data,
obviously,
the important backing data
of your library.
So what's the origin
of OpenStreetMap?
Yeah,
so OpenStreetMap
started maybe 20 years ago
or so.
For folks who haven't
seen it before,
I often describe it
as being akin
to Google Maps
meets Wikipedia.
So it's a worldwide
mapping project
with global coverage.
Anyone can edit
or contribute to it.
There is some editorial
oversight as well
to validate those edits.
But what's cool
about OpenStreetMap
is that its data license
allows you to pull data
from it.
So unlike,
say,
Google Maps,
which is fairly limited
in what all it can draw,
you can really pull
all of these features
from OpenStreetMap.
And if you look,
if you just zoom in
on one of these cities here.
Yeah,
let's go to Riverside.
Yeah.
Yeah,
there's surface streets,
rail lines,
building footprints,
parks,
train stations,
often grocery stores,
restaurants,
public schools,
all this stuff
we're interested in
from an urban planning
perspective.
Yeah.
Oh,
it's really interesting.
And you can add
in additional layers
like cycling maps
or transportation maps
or topology maps,
topological maps,
all sorts of interesting
things here.
Yeah,
exactly.
And it really lets you
kind of hone in
on the specific
characteristics of the city
that you're interested in.
And there's a humanitarian
layer that you can see.
And this has been
one of the big uses
of OpenStreetMap
now for
15 years or so.
often when there is
a disaster
in a less developed
country,
humanitarian aid
organizations will go in
and use OpenStreetMap
and contribute to it
to create
kind of a
digital layer
of the facts
on the ground.
So the Haiti earthquake
a few years back
was a primary example
of that
where it helped them
understand
where urbanization
was,
where there were
water pumps,
toilets,
and so forth,
the kind of things
that people need
but aren't
well mapped
often in these
informal settlements.
Yeah.
Oh, it's
amazing.
We have,
you know,
I think
everyone was amazed
when Google Maps
came out,
right?
Before then,
we had MapQuest
and all those things.
You'd have big little
up arrow,
right arrow
to like pull in tiles
of the world
and,
you know,
Google Maps
and the worldview
that they had.
What was that product
called?
Remember?
Where you could
kind of fly,
it was like a 3D thing.
You could kind of fly
around in the early days
but it was the same
basic data,
I think.
Anyway,
when that stuff came out,
it was like,
wow,
this stuff is,
you can now know
about the world.
You can say,
where did that road go?
I never went down.
You could just follow it
and see or go to
Street View or whatever.
but a lot of that
is locked behind
however Google
wants you to use it,
right?
And it's not
super accessible
and so having
something like this
where people can contribute,
especially if they care
about their neighborhood,
right?
A lot of this,
people are contributing
back into
OpenStreetMap data.
Yeah,
exactly.
so the nice thing
with this is that
it really is much more
in that open source,
open data model
of the world
which means we can do
open science
with it,
citizen science with it.
People,
you know,
who just notice
that stuff is missing
in their own community,
you're able to fix it.
It's no longer
that frustration of,
well,
when will Google
get this thing right?
Hey,
we have this new highway
that was built
outside my town.
When's it going to show up?
I mean,
it's up to you
because you can make it
show up later today.
There is a drawback
to that though.
The drawback
is you get
what we call
sampling biases.
That is,
you tend to see
more coverage
in places
where
people tend
to contribute
more.
And those things
tend to be correlated
with demographic
characteristics.
Men contribute
more than women.
Higher income
places
more than
lower income
places
just from a
resourcing
perspective.
And so one of the
challenges we face
as researchers
using OpenStreetMap
data for our
analytics work
is keeping those
in mind
because it's hard
to do comparative
analysis.
If you don't know,
it's because the
infrastructure is actually
different in two places
places or because
it's been digitized
to a different
extent in two
places.
Right,
right,
right.
Just maybe
higher fidelity
information might
skew some analysis
one way or another,
right?
That's right,
exactly.
And it tends to work
pretty well comparatively
for stuff like roads,
streets,
whereas things like
pedestrian footpaths
or fresh food markets
might be well digitized
in San Francisco
in Portland,
but probably not
say in a small town
in India or Indonesia,
let alone like a
suburb of Des Moines,
Iowa.
Yeah,
yeah,
absolutely.
One of the apps
that I use a lot
is OnX.
Do you know OnX?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah,
OnX is cool.
You can,
I do a lot of off-road
motorcycle riding
and it'll show you
all the little trails
and stuff,
but,
you know,
someone's got to go
and enter all that
information.
and so some places
are super well mapped
and others are not
on the map at all,
but,
yeah,
I imagine they probably
get some of their data
from OpenStreetMap as well,
though I haven't been
able to tell.
Yeah,
it's a good question.
A lot of people
downstream do use
OpenStreetMap data
because of its quality
and accessibility.
Yeah,
Mark out in the audience
is asking,
you know,
is there some kind
of mobile app
that kind of gives you
access to the
OpenStreetMap?
data,
kind of like Google Maps.
Yeah,
there are some mobile apps
for it.
I don't use them.
It has some challenges
with routing
because it is publicly
editable.
Sometimes there'll be
little breaks
in the connections
where it's not digitized
quite right,
but there are routing apps.
You could replace,
say,
Google Maps
on your phone
with OpenStreetMap
and you can route with it.
It works particularly well
in big cities
in places like Europe
and the U.S.,
less so in small rural areas
or in less developed countries.
Yeah,
yeah,
the OnX thing is
it doesn't really route you,
but it shows you on a map
and it shows you
where you go on it
and if you choose
to stay on the path
then it'll really help you,
but it doesn't really say,
you can't say,
give me directions.
At least not when you're off-road.
If you're on-road,
maybe it'll fall back
to something that works,
but yeah,
amazing.
So what's the licensing story
behind all this data?
Like how,
the name probably
gives a lot of it away,
OpenStreetMap,
but how is this data usable?
What can people do with it?
Yeah,
so it's basically usable
for non-commercial purposes
with attribution.
So for example,
as researchers,
when we are using these data,
we just need to attribute
where it came from,
OpenStreetMap
and its contributors.
And I ended up including
that license information
somewhere on the readme
for OSMNX
because I think a lot of time
people will look over
these underlying data sources
and tools
when they're using
these kind of downstream,
downstream tools
and apps.
So because of that,
I just wanted to,
you know,
call it,
yeah,
you can see it on screen here.
So I mentioned
OpenStreetMap's
open data license
requires that derivative works
provide proper attribution,
which is really nice
because it's a very easy thing
to do for the cornucopia
of data that they make available.
Yeah,
that's amazing.
If I wanted to build
a commercial product,
I wanted to build
Onyx squared or whatever
where I could have people
drive around and use that
and map it
and make notes
and maybe contribute back.
Do you know what the story,
I mean,
obviously not a lawyer,
right?
But what's the,
would people be able to
do that
or is there a paid API
or how does it work?
It's a good question.
So I know in practice
people can
because I see commercial tools
that use OpenStreetMap data
all the time.
I don't know the details though
because one of the nice things
about being in academia
is you end up being so divorced
from the commercial world
that I don't have to worry about that.
Yeah,
that's,
that's pretty good,
right?
Just do,
do your research,
answer interesting questions
and follow the lead,
right?
Those are the benefits.
Yeah,
it comes with drawbacks
but those are the benefits.
Yeah,
I'm aware of some of the drawbacks
as well,
for sure.
all right,
well,
so that is the foundation
of this project,
OSM NX.
Tell us about your project.
Yeah,
so
OSM NX is a Python package
that lets you interact
with OpenStreetMap's APIs
to make it really easy
to download data
and build models
or a data frame
of those data.
so the two main things
that it does
is it can create
a graph model
that is a model
of a network
like streets
or rails
or highways
or anything else
or you can create
a geodata frame
that's kind of
a spatialized version
of a pandas data frame
using geopandas
of OpenStreetMap features.
So that's all the stuff
in OpenStreetMap.
It could be points,
lines,
polygons.
It could be, you know,
traffic signals
or parks
or schools
or roads.
But you can download
either of those
and then do whatever
it is you want to do
with them.
And OSM NX
has some other stuff
built in.
so it has a simple
routing engine
built in,
some visualization
tools.
You can work
with elevation
so that you can
figure out
street grades,
particularly relevant,
for example,
if you're a cyclist
and you're trying
to choose
a shortest path
that maybe minimizes
those grades
and so forth.
even for cars,
you know,
Google started
offering a
this path
saves,
uses the least fuel
or in my case
the least electricity,
whatever,
whatever you put into it
to make it go.
That's also,
you know,
that's uses like
that would be interesting.
Yeah,
exactly.
I mean,
kind of superficially
we always imagine
that our shortest path
to get somewhere
is the one that minimizes
our travel time.
But in reality,
there are a lot
of other things
we try to minimize
including fuel consumption
or for pedestrians.
Empirically,
we know that people
will take longer routes
if it's a nicer route.
We're not trying to
shave off a minute
to walk,
you know,
along the arterial road
with the aluminum
to melt right next to it.
You go through the fence
by that old abandoned factory
back here
and you go straight across.
It'll be great.
You'll save a minute.
Like,
yeah,
I'll go the long way.
Exactly.
Amazing.
Okay.
Yeah,
super fun.
And as part
of those visualizations,
can you draw maps?
Can you?
You can.
Yeah.
So it has
some mapping
capabilities.
You can also
plot routes on it.
It ties in
to a folium package,
which is a Python package
to develop
leaflet
JavaScript
web maps.
Okay.
So you can do
interactive web maps
from it.
And then on top
of OSMNX,
there's a cool
downstream package
called pretty maps
that I'm not affiliated
with,
but does really nice,
aesthetically pleasing
mapping.
It's really customizable
and really cool.
Okay.
Do you have a gallery
or something?
I do, yeah.
So if you scroll up
a little bit,
there's a link
to the examples gallery.
It's on GitHub.
Okay.
OSMNX examples.
Oh,
you can pull up
different notebooks,
huh?
Yeah,
exactly.
So each notebook
kind of covers
a different theme
of analyses
that would be
commonly done
with OSMNX.
Oh,
nice.
Yeah,
that's really cool.
And people can just
pull up the notebook
and see how it works.
What one do you think
is a good representative
one to maybe like
get a sense
of how to work with it?
So we count from zero
because we're in the Python world.
So notebook zero,
zero is a good place
to start.
Yeah.
It kind of steps
through some
of the basic functionality
that most users
would be interested
in starting with.
Sure.
Okay.
Yeah.
So people can download
these notebooks
in the examples
repository,
which I'll link to.
Yeah,
that's really good.
exactly.
So there's a getting started
guide in the documentation
after kind of reading
through that.
That examples gallery
is a really good way
to just kind of get
a sense of code
that you can copy
and paste to get started.
Okay.
Excellent.
And 5,000 GitHub stars,
almost 1,000 forks.
You know,
that's quite a bit of traction.
Congratulations.
Yeah,
thanks.
I mean,
it's weird.
This is very much
my side hustle,
but it's also really
been a labor of love
for a long time now.
There is no reward
in academia
for creating
open source packages.
I think if you explain
it very carefully
to academic power brokers,
they say,
that makes sense.
That's great.
That's a good contribution.
But prima facie,
that doesn't mean anything.
Yeah,
it's really,
it's tough to put it
on a 10-year application,
right?
Yeah,
it makes it sound
like you're wasting
your time
and you don't understand
what you're supposed
to be doing
with your time.
But you understand
the research is so easy now.
Yeah.
I mean,
that's really how that started.
I thought I was going
to be able to do this research
without having to create
my own tool,
but it turned out
I was not able to.
Interesting.
What was your background
on programming
at that point?
Yeah,
so my undergrad
and master's degree,
I did computer systems
and information systems.
I worked in the private sector
for a few years
and decided to go back
to school for my PhD
in urban planning.
But when I was coming
into that,
I was pitching myself
as the sort of like
data science analytics
kind of person
in that world,
which was starting
to get kind of hot
at that time.
So it ended up
being a nice fit.
And when I started
my dissertation,
I had this dissertation proposal
that was,
you know,
very,
very nice.
It's kind of big,
grand proposal.
I ended up only doing
the first chapter of it
for my entire dissertation
because of how these things
expand to fill space.
And when I pitched my proposal
to my dissertation committee,
there were a lot of assumptions
about the tools
that were out there.
You know,
I knew OpenStreetMap
was out there.
I'd seen there were some tools
to download
and work with data from it.
So I was pretty sure
we'd be able to create
a nice mathematical graph model
of OpenStreetMap data
automatically.
As I started
on my first week
of making that happen,
I realized
that the tool did not exist.
And in fact,
it was profoundly difficult
to get data
from OpenStreetMap
if you wanted to filter it.
Like,
I just want pedestrian paths,
not everything.
Right.
I just want,
you know,
drivable streets,
not everything else.
And so the first year
of my dissertation work
was creating
the first version
of OSM and X accordingly.
So you must have grants
and stuff
for your research
as academics do.
How much time
are you allowed
to sort of bring
some of that
into, you know,
adding features
back to this project?
Yeah, you know,
back to the benefits
of academia.
The nice thing is
as long as you get
what they want to see done,
as long as those outputs
are there,
your time is really
completely your own, right?
So you teach a couple classes,
you have to publish
a few papers a year.
Other than that,
you're free to do whatever.
So I do get grants
that help me fund
my graduate students.
Ironically,
it's very hard
to get grants
to do this kind of
open source software,
open commons development.
everyone talks about it
and especially grant funders
know how much
we all use this stuff
and they really like it
but it just doesn't get funded.
So what you have to do
is you have to kind of
hack it in
or sideload it,
I guess,
into your grants
where the grant
will answer
this empirical question
that's near and dear
to the funder's heart.
But to do that,
we have this tool building
phase for six months
to be able to unlock
the analytics for it.
and so that's really
how a lot of the features
and a lot of the modules
have been added
to OSMNX over time.
There's this new project
I ought to do
so we'll just build it
into the package.
Right.
We need to be able
to answer new questions
so we got to have
new ways to get
to the data, yeah?
Yeah, exactly.
And it is poorly
incentivized in academia
but academia
has really been home
to a lot of open source
tool development,
especially niche tools,
you know,
from stuff like AstroPy
for the astronomers
and astrophysicists
to things like PySAL,
the spatial analysis library
in Python,
but a lot of things
that academics
have kind of been
at the forefront of,
but for us,
it's always a side hustle.
Right.
Stuff with biology,
psychology,
a lot of the sciences,
I imagine.
Yeah.
working on open source
projects like this
feels to me
very much like
the concept of funding
basic science,
right?
Not funding,
we need to solve
this problem
so we can create a bomb
or new energy
or go to space,
but we're just doing it
because we need to understand
the science better
and it'll help us
then apply it
eventually maybe
at some point,
right?
Same sort of thing here,
like if these exist,
it will supercharge
the urban planning space
to a huge degree,
but getting people
to fund it
or to like care about
helping build that up,
I imagine it's a little bit
frustrating.
No, that's exactly it.
I mean,
the way I talk about it
is it really is
a sort of basic science work
that everyone takes
for granted
as though these things
just exist, right?
That this tool
just exists,
we don't know
where it comes from,
it has an API
that API just exists
and it really kind of
obscures
all of these human decisions
and social structures
and processes
and institutions
that make it difficult
or make other things easy
and really shape
what we end up
being able to work with.
Yeah, absolutely.
Well,
someday,
maybe you can put down,
yeah,
I only wrote two papers
but I have 10,000
get up stars
so
here's your tenure
assignment,
you know?
This is the future,
I'm there for it.
It's a race
between whether
ChatGPT overtakes
all of that stuff
or you get there
and people,
I don't know,
that's all different.
We can talk about that later.
Let's talk about
the Overpass API though.
That's the way
that you get data
from
OpenStreetMap.
What is this?
Yeah,
so
the Overpass API
is another open source
tool
that lets us query
OpenStreetMap's database
and download stuff,
basically,
any
of OpenStreetMap's features.
So
what's nice about Overpass
is that there's
some public instances
that you can just
query as a web API.
You can also host it locally
if you want to work around
throttling limits,
rate limits.
Challenge with
the Overpass API,
you can see a little bit
of it here on screen
is that the Overpass QL,
it's query language,
can be really hard
to work with
to do complex stuff.
So this is a fairly simple one.
On screen,
we can see there's a bounding box
with some lat-long coordinates
to explain where we want
to download data from.
The output will be
in JSON format.
The server timeout
is 90 seconds.
Big queries
can take a long time to run.
And then we're querying here
for way elements.
So way would be
a line feature
in OpenStreetMap.
Any line,
it could be street,
it could also be
the building footprints
boundary line.
I see,
property lines
or zoning
or whatever, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Anything represented
as a line.
And so we get that
back out,
it'll be kicked out
as a JSON.
And what OSMNX does
is it works
with this Overpass API
to try to automate
some of these queries.
so rather than having
to write the query
yourself,
download the data,
and then convert
that raw OpenStreetMap data
into a useful data format,
like drop it into GeoPandas
or into a NetworkX graph,
it assembles all of that
under the hood.
It's open source.
It's well-documented.
I have a few peer-reviewed
articles about
the exact process.
So we don't all
have to reinvent the wheel
trying to work
with this data
because none of this
is automatic.
And in fact,
you know,
10 plus years ago,
people were very laboriously
having to write
these long scripts.
You know what I'm going to do?
I'm going to get
a grad student
and it's going to be
their job for the summer
to convert this
to Excel or MATLAB
for me.
Something like that?
Exactly, yeah.
Grad students are great.
But what's greater,
I think,
is having one or two lines
of code
to replace your grad student
for this year.
100% and let them do
meaningful work
that they also like, right?
Yeah, that's the whole thing.
Yeah, yeah,
it's fantastic.
As I look at this
and think about this,
it feels to me
like OSM and X
is a little bit
like an ORM
is to SQL
and databases, right?
Like,
yeah,
let's you,
you think more
in Python language
and concepts
and don't worry
about the query syntax
and the data
and all that kind of stuff.
Is that a reasonable analogy?
Yeah, that's a good way
to put it.
And the goal
for doing something
like that
is to try to democratize
doing some of these analyses.
You know,
OpenStreetMap data
are really amazing.
Overpass is an amazing resource,
but it's really hard
to work with
unless you have
some software development
or database experience.
And a lot of urban planners
or urban geographers
or urban sociologists
do not.
They have great questions.
They have great theory.
They want a hypothesis test,
right?
But we limit science
if our tools
are too difficult to use
or the right data
are too hard to access.
Yeah.
back to that
basic science
ideas, right?
Yeah.
So for something like this,
what OSMNX does
is it puts
that kind of
overpass query
into much more
natural language.
Since Python
is so readable
in the first place,
you can just say
something like
graph from place,
give it a city name,
say,
Pasadena, California.
My network type
will be drive.
And then just like that,
I have that drivable
street network model
within the city limits
of Pasadena.
Right.
Yeah,
that sounds
entirely more usable.
And one of the things
you said is that
it can be pretty expensive
to query
the overpass API.
And so
your library
caches that stuff locally,
right?
That's right.
Yeah.
So expensive
in the computational sense,
all these things
are free to use.
Yeah,
computationally expensive.
exactly.
And there's a lot
of time complexity
to it as well.
So what we do
is we cache everything,
which helps you
avoid rate limiting.
Let's OSMNX
be a good neighbor
to these free
public commons resources
that are out there.
Yeah,
interesting.
It sounds almost like
you could have
Docker containers
for different cities
that are preloaded
with all the data
that might be
interesting
and just instantaneously
answer a bunch
of questions.
Yeah,
which is really
my workload.
So a lot of what I do
will be
I study every
street network
for every urbanized
area in the world,
right?
So we'll have like
8,000 to 9,000
of these large
urban models.
and so I'll just
have things
cached locally
so that the model
building and analytics
are really at the
forefront rather than
the downloading
and querying
for a day.
Right.
It not only lets you
be a good citizen
and not hammer on
OpenStreetMaps API,
but it just lets
your stuff work faster.
So the incentives
are aligned there,
right?
Yeah,
and in fact,
a lot of the time
when people first
use OSMNX,
you'll download the,
say,
model of Los Angeles,
California,
and it takes a minute
to run the query
on their server,
download whatever
100 megabytes of data,
and then build
that graph theoretic
model,
do all the spatial
stuff to it.
But after that,
it's nice and fast
the next time
that you do it
because you're able
to skip all
that preprocessing.
Right.
It probably puts it
into some super
efficient data structure.
Oct trees
or a tree
or some others,
you know,
maybe dictionary
as you know,
it's right.
Yeah,
yeah,
and we use
spatial indexes
to accelerate
all of the spatial
queries locally
too as well.
Is that built
into Geopandas?
Yeah,
built into Geopandas,
there is an R tree,
which is probably
the most common
spatial index,
but in addition
to that,
we also use
SciPy's
KD tree.
they have a C
implementation
of a K-dimensional
tree
that we use
for the nearest
neighbor search
so that if you,
so for example,
in a Google Maps
you say from my
origin to my
destination,
we can do the
same kind of thing,
say from this
point to that point,
we'll snap the
nearest neighbor
on the network
and then solve
a path between them.
okay,
so just the
K-near's
neighbor algorithm
sort of applied
to,
what is that,
the vectors
of the
intersections
or something
or then you,
the lines?
Yeah,
so normally
when you do
like origins
and destinations,
you would snap
to a node
in the network,
so the nodes
would be like
the intersections
and dead ends
and then the edges
would be the links,
the street segments
that connect
everything together
and when you
solve a path
on a graph,
it would be
from a start
node to an end
node and you'd
minimize it by
something,
either the fewest
hops or the
shortest distance
or the shortest
travel time if you
incorporate,
say,
speed limits,
everything else,
you can bring in
congestion information
to minimize traffic
congested travel time
or minimize going
up and down hills
or anything else.
Excellent.
If I,
I got this data
downloaded and I
wanted to put it
into a proper
database and by
proper,
I mean one that
like is its own
process,
different machines
can talk to it
in parallel and
whatever,
you know,
like Postgres
or Mongo
or something,
are there good
databases that
you would recommend
or that you've
tried like EdgeDB
or Neo4j
or graph databases
the right way to
go or what do
you think?
It depends on
what you're trying
to do in terms
of OpenStreetMap
features,
so if you're just
downloading features
and you're not
worried about
you say those
topological
relationships between
things like in a
street network,
any tabular data
structure will do,
you know,
any kind of like
SQL database
will do just fine.
For a graph model,
yeah,
you'd want some
kind of graph
database because
they can handle
graph algorithms
to do stuff like
routing or other
kinds of graph
analytics like
understanding
connectivity on
the network.
given this node,
tell me all the
things that are
connected to it.
Those kind of
questions can be
answered.
Yeah,
those kind of
questions,
yeah.
Yeah,
they're kind of
pre-computed by
the indices
and the structures.
What about
bringing in other
data?
You know,
what if I have
real estate data
that doesn't come
from OpenStreetMap,
but I want to
pull that in and
overlay it with,
say,
zoning information
overlapped with
census data that
gives me how
much that person
in that area
makes per year
on average or
something like
that?
Can you answer
questions like
that?
Yeah,
really common
use case.
So OSMNX can
kind of do that
by itself,
but mostly as a
tool in the
toolkit to do
it.
So,
you know,
a common way
that we often
will do this
is for
accessibility
analyses.
So,
for example,
here at my
house,
how many
grocery stores
could I
access within
a 15-minute
walk?
And it gives
you a sense
of, you know,
how car
dependent or
not a place
is.
And also,
we can start
looking at food
deserts in
certain communities
where people
don't have
access to
fresh food.
So for that,
what you're
doing is you
have a model
of the network
and then you
also have all
of this point
of interest
data, right?
So where all
these amenities
are located.
You would
then snap
them, load
them onto
the graph,
and then you
can calculate
accessibility
by looking
at where
those things
are located
and you
can either
look at
cumulative
opportunities
within some
time horizon
or distance
to the nearest
opportunity.
You can put
different decays
on it, like
the utility
of it being
so far away
drops off
with a linear
decay the
further I have
to go,
or a non-linear
decay if it
really drops
off fast.
Right.
If a grocery store
is three miles
away, it's not
one-third as
useful as one
that's one
mile away.
It's quite
more to carry
your groceries
that far.
And similarly,
there's marginal
utility for the
30th grocery store
that you can reach.
It doesn't give you
that much benefit
over the 29th
that you can reach.
Whereas the first
and second are
very valuable.
Yeah, if it goes
from zero to one
and one to two,
those are big jumps
right there.
Yep.
Yeah.
Okay.
Very interesting.
How about some
projects that
people might be
thinking about?
You know,
they look at this
data and they're
like, wow,
this looks really
detailed and neat
and we have all
these different
aspects we can
ask about,
but maybe they
just want to
play around.
Yeah.
I mean,
hopefully,
if you look at
the getting started
guide or these
usage examples,
you'll see it's
really easy to
play around.
You know,
two, three lines
of code and you
have a visualization
of your local
street network.
A few things
that we've done
in my lab
at USC
that may spark
some interest.
We look at
air pollution
exposure and
driving patterns
in Los Angeles
to try to
understand,
you know,
who's driving
and where
and then in
turn,
who is exposed
to that tailpipe,
those tailpipe
emissions from
those cars.
So we use
OSMNX to
model those
street networks
to simulate
those trips
and to look
at what
census tracts
that stuff
goes through.
We also use
it for studies
of urban form.
So that is
kind of the
shape,
texture,
density,
the grain
of a city.
I have this
series of
square mile
visualizations
of different
cities around
the world.
And you can
really quickly
see how
different forms
of urbanism
look relative
to each other.
So a place
like Irvine,
California,
here in
Southern
California,
has this
really coarse
grained
street network.
A place
like Venice
in Italy
has incredibly
fine grained
like spiderweb
street network.
Stuff like that
really helps
to kind of
convey these
different modes
of urbanism
and urbanization.
We also use
these to look
at disaster
resilience.
That is,
different street
networks
will be better
if things
start going
wrong around
them.
Things with
more redundancy,
more connectivity
built in
are easier
to route
around if
parts start
failing in
a fire,
in an
earthquake.
So we can
calculate some
of these
characteristics
and then make
recommendations
to planners
and policymakers
about how
to make
your street
network,
how to
intervene in
it to make
it more
resilient.
Yeah,
in my area
there's an
east-west
highway,
one of the
very few
that goes
from the
city west.
It has to
go through
this mountain
tunnel and
it's two
lanes each
way in the
mountain,
or three
lanes in the
mountain tunnel
and there's
even on a
Saturday
afternoon
there's
stopped cars
trying to go
through that
tunnel and
those are on
good days.
Imagine if
there was an
emergency,
it would just
be done.
Yeah,
that's the
26,
right?
Exactly,
it is the
26.
Yeah,
I used to
live in
Portland.
I lived in
Goose Hollow
and my chair
was in
Beaverton,
so I would
have to go
to that
tunnel to
go work
out.
It would
always be
like,
you know,
one of
these days.
Exactly,
yeah,
I live about
a mile from
Goose Hollow
up through
that tunnel.
So,
yeah.
Very cool.
Yeah,
but there's
just,
and that one's
hard to fix
because there's
houses all
along there.
It's a big
hill.
It's hard
to go
over it.
You know,
it would
take a lot
of willpower
to make
another tunnel.
Yeah,
interesting thing.
I did my
PhD at
Berkeley,
and there
is another
tunnel there
that goes
from that
kind of
inner East
Bay,
Berkeley,
Oakland
border,
out to the
further east
suburbs like
Orinda,
Moraga,
and so forth.
And that
tunnel is
really old.
I mean,
it's,
I don't know,
80 years old,
maybe something
like that.
and it
determined
that when
the big
one does
eventually
hit,
it will
fail,
collapse.
And it's
not,
it's cost
prohibitive to
actually prevent
that from
happening.
So the
idea is it
will collapse
and crush
everyone in
that tunnel,
and they
will then build
a new tunnel
at that point
when they have
to.
Oh my
goodness.
We have
to look
forward to.
Yeah,
just go
quickly when
you're in
the tunnel.
Get out
of there.
I always
did.
Amazing.
All right.
Let's talk
real quickly
about integrating
OpenOSMNX
with other
data science
tooling,
right?
We have so
many different
things.
We have
PyTorch,
we have
Pandas,
Polars,
all the
different
things.
Like,
what are the
different
integration
features?
You know,
you talked
about
data
frames,
that sounds
like
Pandas and
Geopandas,
right?
So that's
one sort
of path
across those
things.
Yeah,
so OSMNX
is built
primarily on
top of
three things.
It's
NetworkX
for the
graph
models,
Geopandas
for the
spatial
data
frames,
and
Matplotlib
for the
visualizations.
in the
spatial
Python
world,
most
stuff
happens
in
the
Pandas
ecosystem
because
Geopandas
and
PySAL
similar
tools
are
very
Pandas
oriented.
I know
there's been
some work
toward
Geopolar,
but it's
kind of
in its
infancy,
as far
as I
know,
to this
extent.
But
that'll
be great
when
that's
available.
NetworkX
is another
funny one
because it's
a pure
Python
implementation
has a lot
of loops,
and so it
can go
really slow
over calculating
some of
these big
time complexity
graph algorithms,
things like
betweenness
centrality,
where you have
this massive
OD
major,
basically,
all the nodes
to all the
nodes.
Yeah,
yeah,
some
combinatorial
craziness.
It ends
up being
very time
consuming
to calculate
those kinds
of things
for a
metro
area
sized
network
model.
So
we'll
integrate
with
other
tools.
iGraph
does that
in C.
Also,
using tools
like QGraph
where you
can do it
on the
GPU
instead.
Oh,
wow,
okay,
yeah.
But it's
limited because
the waiting
scheme doesn't
let you say,
I want to
minimize
travel time,
stuff like
that.
I see.
Yeah,
and then
also
integrated
with
Folium
to create
interactive
leaflet
web maps
out of
the box.
Yeah,
I wonder
how that
the free
threaded
Python
stuff will
affect some
of those
computational
things.
Like that
everything
compared
with
everything
else
sounds
like
a
so-called
embarrassingly
parallel
sort of
problem,
right?
And so
if you
could just
say,
well,
you have
10 cores,
so let's
just do
10 blocks
of them
all in
parallel.
Yeah,
so that's
what we
do when
we do
it in
pure
Python.
So we'll
use
multiprocessing
generally
on your
CPUs.
The only
challenge
is that
your OD
matrix,
your origin
destination
matrix is
growing at
this exponential
rate,
but then
there's a
linear number
of cores,
so going
from 1
to 24
and dividing
by a factor
of 24.
when you
have
a million
nodes
times a
million
nodes
in your
graph,
it's going
to take
you a
long time.
It's still
going to be
slow.
You've gone
from months
down to
weeks.
Yeah,
I mean,
you're still
dividing it
by the
number of
cores,
but it
doesn't
necessarily
mean it's
super fast.
Although the
GPU stuff
seems like
it could
absolutely
fly,
right?
Yeah,
that makes
a big
difference,
and I think
that's really
the area
of growth
where handling,
I mean,
basically getting
out of Python
loops in the
first place
is the biggest
area of
growth,
and then doing
things on a,
since these are
really just very
simple linear
algebra problems,
being able to
do them on a
GPU makes it
much more
efficient.
Yeah,
did you hear
about this
thing,
this new
NVIDIA,
I don't know
what it's
called,
Project Digits,
where they
announced a
3000 desktop
dollar desktop
AI computer,
I mean,
they call it
AI,
but really
it's just
a GPU.
It is
interesting,
no,
I hadn't
heard about
that.
And this
thing,
it's the
size of a
Mac mini,
it's this,
if you look
at the
picture,
it's a
little bit
of a
golden
thing,
it's kind
of clever
that made
it gold,
but,
you know,
that's a,
that's a
massive
computer
sitting next
to you,
that you
could run
that,
this is
pretty
interesting,
actually,
I think.
Yeah,
that is,
I mean,
it's shocking
too,
because it
looks so
much smaller
than like
just a
NVIDIA card
in your
desktop.
I think it
basically is
just the
GPU,
and nothing to
do with
graphics,
and then you
just remote
into it over,
I don't know,
a terminal,
or however you,
or maybe you
set it as the
Docker host,
and then you
just do Docker
locally,
but it runs
there,
you know,
that type of
thing.
I don't
know how
it works,
but I kind
of want
one.
Yeah,
I mean,
it looks
sexy enough,
but of course
you would
want one,
right?
Of course,
but if you
had questions
like that,
if you say
I have a
million nodes
and I
could run
that on
a GPU,
getting
something like
this that's,
you know,
kind of the
H100 style
of like the
really large
just meant
for compute,
not really
a graphics
card,
seems like
that would
really unlock
some interesting
options.
Yeah,
totally.
I mean,
yeah,
so I have
a GeForce
card in my
desktop that
I'll pass
some of that
stuff locally
onto,
but another
one of the
academic benefits
at USC,
we have a
high performance
computing buster
that I can
schedule tasks
to run on
that,
say over winter
break,
and then come
back in January
and the month
of 1,000
CPUs is all
done.
That's amazing.
we had a
mainframe,
a silicon
graphics mainframe
when I was
studying math
that we could
all work on
in this group
of maybe 10
of us,
and it
wasn't as big
as what you're
saying,
but it was,
you know,
a quite expensive
big machine.
It had its own
room and it was
really loud to
go into that
room,
and I remember
we came in
to,
I came in
to do
whatever I was
working on
as a grad
student or
whatever,
I think I was
a senior,
anyway,
came in
to work
on my
project,
and nobody
could access
it,
and it was
still in there
making loud
noises like it
was running,
but it acted
like it wasn't
running,
and so what is
going on?
One of the
other grad
students had
run a job
like you're
talking about,
but they were
having trouble
getting into
work because
they were math
people,
not programmers,
and they
started logging
everything,
and there were
no limits on
what people could
do to the
computer,
the people
had set it
up,
and so
what had
happened is
it ran
100% CPU
on all the
cores all night
logging until it
ran out of space,
and then apparently
the computer won't
run anymore if it
has zero more
bytes,
it needed some
temp file or
something,
and so it
was just done.
I imagine you
guys have more
guardrails than
that.
Yeah,
a lot of
guardrails.
I would love
to try to do
something like
that just for
the yuck
sometime,
but we
got to go
whatever.
The admins of
that computer
would not
please with
that grad
student.
I can only
imagine.
It took a
long time to
get it going,
like a day of
work to get
it turned
back on,
because they
didn't even
know what
was wrong
with it at
first,
it just
wouldn't
turn on.
Oh,
well.
Jumping back
a moment
to the,
no,
that's not
the one I
wanted to
copy,
to the
integration,
have you
considered
working with
narwhals?
I looked
into narwhals
recently.
my understanding
is one of
the things
it does
well is it
kind of
abstracts away
from pandas
versus pollers,
so you're
less tool
dependent,
right?
Yeah,
and it
also lets
people who
want to
consume your
library,
who want
to do
their work
in pollers,
talk pollers
to your
project,
and people
want to
do pandas,
talk pandas,
as well as
QDF,
Moden,
Pyro,
and other,
it kind of
is an
adapting
layer,
so people
can work
in their
native
framework
and then
talk to
you.
Yeah.
I mean,
yeah,
on paper
it sounds
great.
I haven't
played with
it yet,
other than
just being
familiar with
it,
but I mean,
that sounds
like the
ideal,
right?
We shouldn't
be enforcing
these certain
APIs or
languages on
people.
Yeah,
it does look
interesting.
I believe
it's foundational
internals or
maybe just
the API,
but they're
pollers,
not pandas,
so maybe
that's not
as good
of a fit,
but it could
be an
interesting
thing to look
in the future
to sort
of make it
native to all
the different
data frame libraries
that people
want to talk
in.
Yeah,
yeah,
definitely.
Are you going
to need a new
grant?
Yeah,
here's the basic
science stuff,
right?
I mean,
if I can't get
them interested
in network models,
I don't know
about getting
into the nuts
and bolts
of which
data frame
API we're
going to have
people use.
yeah,
absolutely.
All right,
well,
let's close
this whole
conversation
out by
talking about
something that
I know is
on a lot
of people's
minds,
and that's
LLMs.
And,
you know,
what do LLMs
mean for this
mapping data
and the types
of questions
you can answer
and OSMNX,
all these types
of things?
Like,
how's that
shaping your
world?
Yeah,
so,
two ways
that I like
to think about it.
One is what
LLMs have to
offer us today,
and then one
is what LLMs
have to offer us,
say,
five to ten years
from now.
That is,
how do we
future-proof
ourselves,
our careers,
our livelihoods,
and,
I mean,
or just optimistically,
how do we
really get ahead
of it to take
advantage of
nice things
that they'll
have to offer?
Today,
I am
deeply unimpressed
with most of
the use cases
that I see
for it.
I think that
the outputs
only look good
to people
who aren't
experts and
don't know
how wrong
it is.
It does
some things
well,
you know,
like having
a copilot
while you're
coding and
having it
recommending,
that's nice.
I mean,
it's like
tab complete
from years
ago.
It's the
same kind
of thing,
just iterating
it.
But,
you know,
when someone
tells it,
you know,
here's the
prompt,
generate my
algorithm for
me,
two things.
One,
it very often
doesn't do that
good of a job
even at this
point,
and number
two,
if you don't
enjoy doing
that kind
of thing,
I'm not
sure why
you're in
software
development
in the first
place.
For me,
when I
interface with
it,
it's usually
in the
classroom.
And you'll
have,
so,
you know,
people like to
complain to kids
these days.
It's the same
way it was
when I was
in school.
You know,
a third of
the class
loves a
subject.
They're just
killing it.
They want to
be there.
They want a
job in this.
A third of
the class,
they're like,
well,
it's a required
class.
I'll try to
do what I
can.
And a third
of them say,
I don't know
why I'm here.
Why is this a
required course?
I hate this.
Is there any
way I can cheat
to just get a
passing grade?
Where's my
shortcut?
Exactly.
I mean,
and,
you know,
the difference
today is that
LLMs make it
so much easier
and they really
normalized cheating
as well.
Where we don't
have that good
of systems in
place to be
able to detect
it for code,
for writing,
for anything.
And I think
one of the
problems here,
you know,
it goes back
to like licensing
or attribution.
When we
normalize this
kind of cheating,
we're normalizing
taking credit
for things
that aren't
our work.
and if we're
doing that
in school,
we build
those habits.
What's it
going to look
like when
we're working
in the workforce?
We either
don't have
the skills
that people
think we
have or
we think
it's just
normal,
acceptable
practice to
copy and
paste and say
here's my
intellectual
contribution.
It's too much
of a crutch
and if,
you know,
maybe it
solves 90%
of the problems
but that 10%
it doesn't,
you're fully
incapable of
approaching that
problem,
right?
Exactly,
yeah.
And I think,
you know,
so if that's
the first part,
what LLMs offer
us today,
I think the
second part is
say five to
10 years
from now.
And part of it
is scary
and part of it
is exciting.
I think that
coding as it
looks today
is going to
largely go away
over my
lifetime
because coding
is this mix
of art
and intellectual
labor
and manual
labor.
the manual
labor
parts,
you know,
will be
going away
and that's
where a lot
of people
use LLMs
now to
reduce
that grind
of coding
and I think
it's important
for us
to figure out
where those
intellectual
contributions are,
where the art,
the poetry
of coding
remains a
human contribution
moving forward,
where we have,
you know,
that sort of
human in the
loop to make
ethical decisions
that we don't
pass off,
where it is
humans who are
doing some of
the architecting
and not just
handing it off
saying,
here's a prompt,
now redesign
our financial
system from the
ground up for us,
but that it
remains human
guardrails and
human ethics
and human
notions of
justice that we
use AI to
help us,
but it doesn't
replace that.
Yeah,
I feel like
there's going to
be a lot of
people who are
programmers now
are going to
have to kind
of be a senior
tech,
tech team
lead type of
thing where
the team is
asking the
LLM to do
stuff for you,
and that's
going to be
awesome for
those people,
us,
but for the
people who are
brand new,
there's going to
be a wider
gap to try to
cross,
it's going to
be harder and
harder to go
from real
beginner to
that level
when,
who's going to
employ you
when it takes
you a day,
and I can ask
the LLM to do
it in five
minutes and I
got to review
it either way.
That's a very
concerning social
consequence,
I think.
Exactly.
Those kind
of entry
level jobs
are very
much more
labor focused.
The senior
dev isn't
doing that
because someone
with less
experience,
less pay
can do it,
and if
LLMs replace
that over
time,
it's really
hard to get
your foot in
the door
of that
industry.
It's going
to be like
COBOL programmers
did not
a program
without an
LLM
someday.
I don't
know if
that's good
or bad,
but it's
going to be
weird.
Anyway,
I think
it's probably
pretty interesting
and given
access with
your API
and with all
this data,
I'm sure
people will
be able to
ask and
answer
interesting
questions with
it.
That's the
hope.
Indeed.
All right.
Two really
quick things
to close out
our conversation.
Roadmap,
anything on
the roadmap
coming real
soon that
people have
been asking
about,
thinking about?
I just
released
V2.0.
Thank you.
That was
really just
a year
of rethinking
the API.
I was going
to allow
myself breaking
changes,
really cleaning
things up.
I added
type annotations
for the first
time.
I really
changed the
linting and
formatting,
CI,
pre-commit,
everything.
It's a much
more rigorous
package at
this point.
I'm taking
a breather
right now
where I
don't have
that much
big on
the horizon.
I try to
keep a
really clean
issue board
as well where
I quickly
triage.
This is in
scope,
this is not.
I noticed
you have
three open
issues and
zero PRs,
which is
awesome.
I try to
do it
courteously.
I'll tell
people a lot
of the time
this isn't
in scope
for the
project,
but I
appreciate
the
suggestion.
I'm
busy,
so keeping
a clean
issue board
makes my
life simple.
Short answer,
I'm taking
a
breather
instead of
roadmapping.
But you
just had a
big release,
which is
cool.
Yeah.
Contributions
accepted?
Absolutely.
And very
often what
I ask
when someone
opens an
issue and
I say,
yeah,
that does
sound
useful.
Would you
like to
open a
PR?
in as
much as
this is
my side
hustle,
most of
the pull
requests
that I
add to
it are
very much
aligned with
a current
or recent
research project
that I'm
working on.
Right.
So for
others,
you know,
if you see
a gap
or a
cool feature
that could
make people's
lives easier,
better analytics
down the road,
please propose
it and I'd
love a
contribution.
Excellent.
All right.
Final call to
action.
People are
psyched about
mapping.
They want to
get started.
What do you
tell them?
I tell
them to
work through
existing examples
from the tools
that are out
there.
If you haven't
done any
kind of mapping
before,
there's a lot
of cool
packages in
R and
Python.
Find
something you're
comfortable
with,
work through
some tutorials
and then figure
out something
close to home.
It's so much
easier if you
have that kind
of local
motivation,
local knowledge.
Do some
mapping,
do an
analysis in
your community
for something
that's bothering
you that you
think could be
better.
Excellent.
All right.
Well, thank you
for being here
and congrats
on the cool
project.
Thank you
very much.
Yep.
Bye.
Okay.